rollout_server/docs/DEPLOYMENT.md, before:

# Production Deployment Guide

**Last Updated**: 2025-12-05

## Overview

This guide covers deploying the Remote Rollout Server in production environments alongside TrainGate training infrastructure.

## Prerequisites

- Python 3.11+
- Docker (recommended for production)
- Access to HuggingFace model hub (for tokenizer downloads)
- Network connectivity to training cluster

## Deployment Options

### Option 1: Docker (Recommended)

#### Dockerfile

```dockerfile
FROM python:3.11-slim

WORKDIR /app

# Install system dependencies
RUN apt-get update && apt-get install -y --no-install-recommends \
    curl \
    && rm -rf /var/lib/apt/lists/*

# Install uv for fast dependency management
RUN pip install uv

# Copy project files
COPY pyproject.toml uv.lock ./
COPY src/ ./src/

# Install dependencies
RUN uv sync --frozen --no-dev

# Set environment variables
ENV PYTHONUNBUFFERED=1
ENV ROLLOUT_SERVER_PORT=9000

# Health check
HEALTHCHECK --interval=30s --timeout=10s --start-period=5s --retries=3 \
    CMD curl -f http://localhost:${ROLLOUT_SERVER_PORT}/health || exit 1

# Run server
EXPOSE 9000
CMD ["uv", "run", "python", "-m", "rollout_server.server"]
```

#### Build and Run

```bash
# Build image
docker build -t rollout-server:latest .

# Run container
docker run -d \
    --name rollout-server \
    -p 9000:9000 \
    -e TOKENIZER_CACHE_SIZE=10 \
    -e HTTP_CLIENT_TIMEOUT=600 \
    -e TOKENIZER_TRUST_REMOTE_CODE=false \
    rollout-server:latest
```

### Option 2: Kubernetes

#### Deployment Manifest

```yaml
apiVersion: apps/v1
kind: Deployment
metadata:
  name: rollout-server
  labels:
    app: rollout-server
spec:
  replicas: 3
  selector:
    matchLabels:
      app: rollout-server
  template:
    metadata:
      labels:
        app: rollout-server
    spec:
      containers:
      - name: rollout-server
        image: rollout-server:latest
        ports:
        - containerPort: 9000
        env:
        - name: ROLLOUT_SERVER_PORT
          value: "9000"
        - name: TOKENIZER_CACHE_SIZE
          value: "10"
        - name: HTTP_CLIENT_TIMEOUT
          value: "600"
        - name: TOKENIZER_TRUST_REMOTE_CODE
          value: "false"
        resources:
          requests:
            memory: "4Gi"
            cpu: "2"
          limits:
            memory: "8Gi"
            cpu: "4"
        livenessProbe:
          httpGet:
            path: /health
            port: 9000
          initialDelaySeconds: 10
          periodSeconds: 30
        readinessProbe:
          httpGet:
            path: /health
            port: 9000
          initialDelaySeconds: 5
          periodSeconds: 10
---
apiVersion: v1
kind: Service
metadata:
  name: rollout-server
spec:
  selector:
    app: rollout-server
  ports:
  - port: 9000
    targetPort: 9000
  type: ClusterIP
```

### Option 3: Systemd Service

```ini
# /etc/systemd/system/rollout-server.service
[Unit]
Description=Remote Rollout Server
After=network.target

[Service]
Type=simple
User=rollout
Group=rollout
WorkingDirectory=/opt/rollout-server
Environment=ROLLOUT_SERVER_PORT=9000
Environment=TOKENIZER_CACHE_SIZE=10
Environment=HTTP_CLIENT_TIMEOUT=600
Environment=TOKENIZER_TRUST_REMOTE_CODE=false
ExecStart=/opt/rollout-server/.venv/bin/python -m rollout_server.server
Restart=always
RestartSec=5

[Install]
WantedBy=multi-user.target
```

## Configuration

### Environment Variables

| Variable | Default | Production Recommendation | Description |
|----------|---------|--------------------------|-------------|
| `ROLLOUT_SERVER_PORT` | `9000` | `9000` | Server port (avoid 8080-8130 used by TrainGate) |
| `TOKENIZER_CACHE_SIZE` | `5` | `10-20` | Increase for multi-model deployments |
| `HTTP_CLIENT_TIMEOUT` | `300.0` | `600.0` | Increase for long-running generations |
| `TOKENIZER_TRUST_REMOTE_CODE` | `false` | `false` | Only enable for trusted models |

### Resource Sizing

| Deployment Size | Memory | CPU | Tokenizer Cache | Concurrent Rollouts |
|-----------------|--------|-----|-----------------|---------------------|
| Small | 4GB | 2 cores | 5 | ~10 |
| Medium | 8GB | 4 cores | 10 | ~50 |
| Large | 16GB | 8 cores | 20 | ~200 |

**Note**: Each tokenizer uses ~1-2GB memory. Size the cache based on:
- Number of different models used
- Available memory
- Expected concurrent requests

## Network Configuration

### Firewall Rules

```bash
# Allow incoming requests from OsmosisAgentLoop
ufw allow from 10.0.0.0/8 to any port 9000 proto tcp

# Allow outgoing to trainer nodes (adjust IP range)
ufw allow out to 10.0.0.0/8 port 8080:8130 proto tcp
```

### Load Balancing

For high-availability deployments, use a load balancer:

```nginx
# nginx.conf
upstream rollout_servers {
    least_conn;
    server rollout-server-1:9000 weight=1;
    server rollout-server-2:9000 weight=1;
    server rollout-server-3:9000 weight=1;
}

server {
    listen 9000;
    
    location / {
        proxy_pass http://rollout_servers;
        proxy_http_version 1.1;
        proxy_set_header Connection "";
        proxy_connect_timeout 60s;
        proxy_read_timeout 600s;
        proxy_send_timeout 600s;
    }
    
    location /health {
        proxy_pass http://rollout_servers/health;
    }
}
```

## Monitoring

### Health Check Endpoint

```bash
curl http://localhost:9000/health
# Response: {"status": "healthy", "service": "rollout-server"}
```

### Metrics to Monitor

1. **Request latency** - `/rollout` endpoint response time
2. **Error rate** - Count of ERROR status responses
3. **Token throughput** - Tokens processed per second
4. **Memory usage** - Especially tokenizer cache size
5. **HTTP client pool** - Connection utilization

### Prometheus Metrics (Future Enhancement)

```python
# Example metrics to expose
rollout_requests_total{status="completed|error"}
rollout_duration_seconds{quantile="0.5|0.9|0.99"}
llm_calls_total
tool_calls_total
tokenizer_cache_size
tokenizer_cache_hits_total
tokenizer_cache_misses_total
```

### Logging

Configure structured JSON logging for production:

```python
import logging
import json

class JSONFormatter(logging.Formatter):
    def format(self, record):
        return json.dumps({
            "timestamp": self.formatTime(record),
            "level": record.levelname,
            "logger": record.name,
            "message": record.getMessage(),
            "rollout_id": getattr(record, "rollout_id", None),
        })
```

## Security Considerations

### 1. Network Security

- Deploy in private network (VPC)
- Use TLS for all external communications
- Restrict access to known trainer IPs

### 2. Tokenizer Security

```bash
# Default: Disable remote code execution
TOKENIZER_TRUST_REMOTE_CODE=false

# Only enable for verified models
# TOKENIZER_TRUST_REMOTE_CODE=true  # DANGEROUS
```

### 3. Input Validation

The server validates all inputs via Pydantic:
- `rollout_id` length limits
- `messages` non-empty requirement
- URL format validation
- Numeric bounds checking

### 4. Error Handling

- Internal errors return generic messages
- No stack traces exposed to clients
- Detailed errors logged server-side only

## Troubleshooting

### Common Issues

#### 1. Tokenizer Download Timeout

**Symptom**: Server hangs on first request

**Solution**:
```bash
# Pre-download tokenizers before deployment
python -c "from transformers import AutoTokenizer; AutoTokenizer.from_pretrained('Qwen/Qwen3-8B')"

# Or use HuggingFace cache volume
docker run -v /path/to/hf-cache:/root/.cache/huggingface ...
```

#### 2. Connection Refused to Trainer

**Symptom**: `Network error communicating with trainer`

**Solution**:
- Verify trainer URL is reachable
- Check firewall rules
- Ensure trainer is running

#### 3. Out of Memory

**Symptom**: Server crashes or OOM killed

**Solution**:
- Reduce `TOKENIZER_CACHE_SIZE`
- Increase container memory limits
- Use smaller tokenizers if possible

#### 4. High Latency

**Symptom**: Rollouts take too long

**Solution**:
- Check network latency to trainer
- Increase `HTTP_CLIENT_TIMEOUT`
- Profile tool execution time

### Debug Mode

```bash
# Enable debug logging
LOG_LEVEL=DEBUG uv run python -m rollout_server.server

# Check tokenizer cache status
curl http://localhost:9000/health  # (extend to include cache stats)
```

## Scaling Strategies

### Horizontal Scaling

- Rollout servers are stateless
- Scale by adding more replicas
- Use load balancer for distribution

### Vertical Scaling

- Increase memory for more tokenizer cache
- More CPU cores for parallel tool execution

### Cache Warming

Pre-load frequently used tokenizers at startup:

```python
# Add to server startup
PRELOAD_TOKENIZERS = ["Qwen/Qwen3-8B", "meta-llama/Llama-3-8B"]

async def warm_cache():
    for tokenizer_name in PRELOAD_TOKENIZERS:
        await load_tokenizer_async(tokenizer_name)
```

## See Also

- [ARCHITECTURE.md](ARCHITECTURE.md) - System design and data flow
- [RESPONSE_MASK_GUIDE.md](RESPONSE_MASK_GUIDE.md) - Critical response_mask documentation
- [TESTING.md](TESTING.md) - Test suite documentation

Commit message:

Update .gitignore to include additional backup environment files and enhance README documentation with clearer instructions on tokenizer usage. Modify ARCHITECTURE and DEPLOYMENT documents to reflect changes in tokenizer trust settings for Qwen3 models. Improve integration tests to verify response mask functionality and ensure consistent tokenizer application across examples and mocks.

rollout_server/docs/DEPLOYMENT.md, after:

# Production Deployment Guide

**Last Updated**: 2025-12-05

## Overview

This guide covers deploying the Remote Rollout Server in production environments alongside TrainGate training infrastructure.

## Prerequisites

- Python 3.11+
- Docker (recommended for production)
- Access to HuggingFace model hub (for tokenizer downloads)
- Network connectivity to training cluster

## Deployment Options

### Option 1: Docker (Recommended)

#### Dockerfile

```dockerfile
FROM python:3.11-slim

WORKDIR /app

# Install system dependencies
RUN apt-get update && apt-get install -y --no-install-recommends \
    curl \
    && rm -rf /var/lib/apt/lists/*

# Install uv for fast dependency management
RUN pip install uv

# Copy project files
COPY pyproject.toml uv.lock ./
COPY src/ ./src/

# Install dependencies
RUN uv sync --frozen --no-dev

# Set environment variables
ENV PYTHONUNBUFFERED=1
ENV ROLLOUT_SERVER_PORT=9000

# Health check
HEALTHCHECK --interval=30s --timeout=10s --start-period=5s --retries=3 \
    CMD curl -f http://localhost:${ROLLOUT_SERVER_PORT}/health || exit 1

# Run server
EXPOSE 9000
CMD ["uv", "run", "python", "-m", "rollout_server.server"]
```

#### Build and Run

```bash
# Generate lock file first (required for --frozen)
uv lock

# Build image
docker build -t rollout-server:latest .

# Run container
# Note: TOKENIZER_TRUST_REMOTE_CODE=true is required for Qwen3 models
docker run -d \
    --name rollout-server \
    -p 9000:9000 \
    -e TOKENIZER_CACHE_SIZE=10 \
    -e HTTP_CLIENT_TIMEOUT=600 \
    -e TOKENIZER_TRUST_REMOTE_CODE=true \
    rollout-server:latest
```

### Option 2: Kubernetes

#### Deployment Manifest

```yaml
apiVersion: apps/v1
kind: Deployment
metadata:
  name: rollout-server
  labels:
    app: rollout-server
spec:
  replicas: 3
  selector:
    matchLabels:
      app: rollout-server
  template:
    metadata:
      labels:
        app: rollout-server
    spec:
      containers:
      - name: rollout-server
        image: rollout-server:latest
        ports:
        - containerPort: 9000
        env:
        - name: ROLLOUT_SERVER_PORT
          value: "9000"
        - name: TOKENIZER_CACHE_SIZE
          value: "10"
        - name: HTTP_CLIENT_TIMEOUT
          value: "600"
        - name: TOKENIZER_TRUST_REMOTE_CODE
          value: "true"  # Required for Qwen3 models
        resources:
          requests:
            memory: "4Gi"
            cpu: "2"
          limits:
            memory: "8Gi"
            cpu: "4"
        livenessProbe:
          httpGet:
            path: /health
            port: 9000
          initialDelaySeconds: 10
          periodSeconds: 30
        readinessProbe:
          httpGet:
            path: /health
            port: 9000
          initialDelaySeconds: 5
          periodSeconds: 10
---
apiVersion: v1
kind: Service
metadata:
  name: rollout-server
spec:
  selector:
    app: rollout-server
  ports:
  - port: 9000
    targetPort: 9000
  type: ClusterIP
```

### Option 3: Systemd Service

```ini
# /etc/systemd/system/rollout-server.service
[Unit]
Description=Remote Rollout Server
After=network.target

[Service]
Type=simple
User=rollout
Group=rollout
WorkingDirectory=/opt/rollout-server
Environment=ROLLOUT_SERVER_PORT=9000
Environment=TOKENIZER_CACHE_SIZE=10
Environment=HTTP_CLIENT_TIMEOUT=600
Environment=TOKENIZER_TRUST_REMOTE_CODE=true
ExecStart=/opt/rollout-server/.venv/bin/python -m rollout_server.server
Restart=always
RestartSec=5

[Install]
WantedBy=multi-user.target
```

## Configuration

### Environment Variables

| Variable | Default | Production Recommendation | Description |
|----------|---------|--------------------------|-------------|
| `ROLLOUT_SERVER_PORT` | `9000` | `9000` | Server port (avoid 8080-8130 used by TrainGate) |
| `TOKENIZER_CACHE_SIZE` | `5` | `10-20` | Increase for multi-model deployments |
| `HTTP_CLIENT_TIMEOUT` | `300.0` | `600.0` | Increase for long-running generations |
| `TOKENIZER_TRUST_REMOTE_CODE` | `true` | `true` | Required for Qwen3 and other models with custom tokenizer code |

### Resource Sizing

| Deployment Size | Memory | CPU | Tokenizer Cache | Concurrent Rollouts |
|-----------------|--------|-----|-----------------|---------------------|
| Small | 4GB | 2 cores | 5 | ~10 |
| Medium | 8GB | 4 cores | 10 | ~50 |
| Large | 16GB | 8 cores | 20 | ~200 |

**Note**: Each tokenizer uses ~1-2GB memory. Size the cache based on:
- Number of different models used
- Available memory
- Expected concurrent requests

## Network Configuration

### Firewall Rules

```bash
# Allow incoming requests from OsmosisAgentLoop
ufw allow from 10.0.0.0/8 to any port 9000 proto tcp

# Allow outgoing to trainer nodes (adjust IP range)
ufw allow out to 10.0.0.0/8 port 8080:8130 proto tcp
```

### Load Balancing

For high-availability deployments, use a load balancer:

```nginx
# nginx.conf
upstream rollout_servers {
    least_conn;
    server rollout-server-1:9000 weight=1;
    server rollout-server-2:9000 weight=1;
    server rollout-server-3:9000 weight=1;
}

server {
    listen 9000;
    
    location / {
        proxy_pass http://rollout_servers;
        proxy_http_version 1.1;
        proxy_set_header Connection "";
        proxy_connect_timeout 60s;
        proxy_read_timeout 600s;
        proxy_send_timeout 600s;
    }
    
    location /health {
        proxy_pass http://rollout_servers/health;
    }
}
```

## Monitoring

### Health Check Endpoint

```bash
curl http://localhost:9000/health
# Response: {"status": "healthy", "service": "rollout-server"}
```

### Metrics to Monitor

1. **Request latency** - `/rollout` endpoint response time
2. **Error rate** - Count of ERROR status responses
3. **Token throughput** - Tokens processed per second
4. **Memory usage** - Especially tokenizer cache size
5. **HTTP client pool** - Connection utilization

### Prometheus Metrics (Future Enhancement)

```python
# Example metrics to expose
rollout_requests_total{status="completed|error"}
rollout_duration_seconds{quantile="0.5|0.9|0.99"}
llm_calls_total
tool_calls_total
tokenizer_cache_size
tokenizer_cache_hits_total
tokenizer_cache_misses_total
```

### Logging

Configure structured JSON logging for production:

```python
import logging
import json

class JSONFormatter(logging.Formatter):
    def format(self, record):
        return json.dumps({
            "timestamp": self.formatTime(record),
            "level": record.levelname,
            "logger": record.name,
            "message": record.getMessage(),
            "rollout_id": getattr(record, "rollout_id", None),
        })
```

## Security Considerations

### 1. Network Security

- Deploy in private network (VPC)
- Use TLS for all external communications
- Restrict access to known trainer IPs

### 2. Tokenizer Security

```bash
# Default: Disable remote code execution
TOKENIZER_TRUST_REMOTE_CODE=false

# Only enable for verified models
# TOKENIZER_TRUST_REMOTE_CODE=true  # DANGEROUS
```

### 3. Input Validation

The server validates all inputs via Pydantic:
- `rollout_id` length limits
- `messages` non-empty requirement
- URL format validation
- Numeric bounds checking

### 4. Error Handling

- Internal errors return generic messages
- No stack traces exposed to clients
- Detailed errors logged server-side only

## Troubleshooting

### Common Issues

#### 1. Tokenizer Download Timeout

**Symptom**: Server hangs on first request

**Solution**:
```bash
# Pre-download tokenizers before deployment
# Note: Qwen3 requires trust_remote_code=True for custom tokenizer code
python -c "from transformers import AutoTokenizer; AutoTokenizer.from_pretrained('Qwen/Qwen3-8B', trust_remote_code=True)"

# Or use HuggingFace cache volume
docker run -v /path/to/hf-cache:/root/.cache/huggingface ...
```

#### 2. Connection Refused to Trainer

**Symptom**: `Network error communicating with trainer`

**Solution**:
- Verify trainer URL is reachable
- Check firewall rules
- Ensure trainer is running

#### 3. Out of Memory

**Symptom**: Server crashes or OOM killed

**Solution**:
- Reduce `TOKENIZER_CACHE_SIZE`
- Increase container memory limits
- Use smaller tokenizers if possible

#### 4. High Latency

**Symptom**: Rollouts take too long

**Solution**:
- Check network latency to trainer
- Increase `HTTP_CLIENT_TIMEOUT`
- Profile tool execution time

### Debug Mode

```bash
# Enable debug logging
LOG_LEVEL=DEBUG uv run python -m rollout_server.server

# Check tokenizer cache status
curl http://localhost:9000/health  # (extend to include cache stats)
```

## Scaling Strategies

### Horizontal Scaling

- Rollout servers are stateless
- Scale by adding more replicas
- Use load balancer for distribution

### Vertical Scaling

- Increase memory for more tokenizer cache
- More CPU cores for parallel tool execution

### Cache Warming

Pre-load frequently used tokenizers at startup:

```python
# Add to server startup
PRELOAD_TOKENIZERS = ["Qwen/Qwen3-8B", "meta-llama/Llama-3-8B"]

async def warm_cache():
    for tokenizer_name in PRELOAD_TOKENIZERS:
        await load_tokenizer_async(tokenizer_name)
```

## See Also

- [ARCHITECTURE.md](ARCHITECTURE.md) - System design and data flow
- [RESPONSE_MASK_GUIDE.md](RESPONSE_MASK_GUIDE.md) - Critical response_mask documentation
- [TESTING.md](TESTING.md) - Test suite documentation
